Introduces the concepts and skills necessary to effectively use information technology. Includes basic concepts and some practical skills with computer and networks. Prerequisites: none.. Exploration of topics in mathematics and engineering as they relate to classical architecture in Rome, Italy. In depth geometrical analysis and computer modeling of basic structures (arches, vaults, domes), and on-site studies of the Colosseum, Pantheon, Roman Forum, and St. Peter’s Basilica. Prerequisites: Math 10A or Math 20A; departmental approval, and corequisite of CSE 6GS.. Companion course to CSE 4GS where theory is applied and lab experiments are carried out “in the field” in Rome, Italy. For final projects, students will select a complex structure (e.g., the Colosseum, the Pantheon, St. Peter’s, etc.) to analyze and model, in detail, using computer-based tools. Prerequisites: Math 10A or Math 20B; departmental approval, and corequisite of CSE 4GS.. (Formerly CSE 62A) Introduction to algorithms and top-down problem solving. Introduction to the C language, including functions, arrays, and standard libraries. Basic skills for using a PC graphical user interface operating system environment. File maintenance utilities are covered. (A student may not receive credit for CSE 5A after receiving credit for CSE 10 or CSE 11 or CSE 8B or CSE 9B or CSE 62B or CSE 65.) Prerequisites: A familiarity with high-school level algebra is expected, but this course assumes no prior programming knowledge.. Fundamentals of computer programming and basic software design covering topics related to variables, functions, and control structures; writing, testing, and debugging programs in Matlab. Examples focus on scientific applications. Recommended preparation: high school algebra and familiarity with the computing milieu. Students with limited computing experience may take CSE 3 for preparation. Students may not take CSE 7 after completing COGS 18. Program or material fee may apply. Prerequistes: none.. Introductory computer science course designed for students interested in computing. No prior programming experience is assumed. Learn fundamental concepts of applied computer science using media computation. Must be taken concurrently with CSE 8AL. CSE 8A is part of a three-track course (CSE 8A, CSE 8AL, and CSE 8B) that is equivalent to CSE 11. Students should take CSE 8B to complete this track. Students who have taken CSE 8B or CSE 11 may not take CSE 8A. Recommended preparation: high school algebra and familiarity with computing concepts. Prerequisites: corequisite of CSE 8AL.. Exercises in the theory and practice of computer science under the supervision of an instructor. Hands-on experience with designing, editing, compiling, and executing programming constructs and applications. Must be taken concurrently with CSE 8A. CSE 8AL is part of a three-track course (CSE 8A, CSE 8AL, and CSE 8B) that is equivalent to CSE 11. Students should take CSE 8B to complete this track. Students who have taken CSE 8B or CSE 11 may not take CSE 8AL. Recommended preparation: high school algebra and familiarity with computing concepts. Prerequisites: corequisite of CSE 8A.. Continuation of the Java language. Continuation of programming techniques. More on inheritance. Exception handling. CSE 8A is part of a three-track course (CSE 8A, CSE 8AL, and CSE 8B) that is equivalent to CSE 11. Students who have taken CSE 11 may not take CSE 8B. Recommended preparation: high school algebra and familiarity with computing concepts or CSE 8A and CSE 8AL.. An accelerated introduction to computer science and programming using the Java language. Basic UNIX. Modularity and abstraction. Documentation, testing and verification techniques. Basic object-oriented programming, including inheritance and dynamic binding. Exception handling. Event-driven and dynamic binding. Exception handling. Event-driven programming. Experience with AWT library or other similar library. Students who have completed CSE 8B may not take CSE 11. Recommended preparation: high school algebra and familiarity with computing concepts and a course in a compiled language. Prerequisites: minimum score of 4 on the AP Computer Science A exam.. Use and implementation of basic data structures including linked lists, stacks, and queues. Use of advanced structures such as binary trees and hash tables. Object-oriented design including interfaces, polymorphism, encapsulation, abstract data types, pre-/post-conditions. Recursion. Uses Java and Java Collections. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11, and concurrent enrollment with CSE 15L.. Hands-on exploration of software development tools and techniques. Investigation of the scientific process as applied to software development and debugging. Emphasis is on weekly hands-on laboratory experiences, development of laboratory notebooking techniques as applied to software design. Prerequisites: CSE 8B, or CSE 11. Concurrent enrollment with CSE 12.. Basic discrete mathematical structure: sets, relations, functions, sequences, equivalence relations, partial orders, and number systems. Methods of reasoning and proofs: propositional logic, predicate logic, induction, recursion, and pigeonhole principle. Infinite sets and diagonalization. Basic counting techniques; permutation and combinations. Applications will be given to digital logic design, elementary number theory, design of programs, and proofs of program correctness. Credit not offered for both Math 15A and CSE 20. Equivalent to Math 15A. Prerequisites: CSE 8A or CSE 8B or CSE 11. CSE 8B or CSE 11 may be taken concurrently with CSE 20/ Math 15A.. This course will provide an introduction to the discrete mathematical tools needed to analyze algorithms and systems. Enumerative combinatorics: basic counting principles, inclusion-exclusion, and generating functions. Matrix notation. Applied discrete probability. Finite automata. Credit not offered for both Math 15B and CSE 21. Equivalent to Math 15B. Prerequisites: CSE 20 or Math 15A.. Introduction to organization of modern digital computers—understanding the various components of a computer and their interrelationships. Study of a specific architecture/machine with emphasis on systems programming in C and Assembly languages in a UNIX environment. Prerequisites: CSE 12, CSE 15L, or consent of instructor.. The objective of the course is to help the programmer create a productive UNIX environment. Topics include customizing the shell, file system, shell programming, process management, and UNIX tools. Prerequisites: CSE 8B or CSE 11.. Helps the Java programmer to be productive in the C++ programming environment. Topics include the similarities and differences between Java and C++ with special attention to pointers, operator overloading, templates, the STL, the preprocessor, and the C++ Runtime Environment. Prerequisites: CSE 12 or consent of instructor.. The Freshman Seminar Program is designed to provide new students with the opportunity to explore an intellectual topic with a faculty member in a small seminar setting. Freshman seminars are offered in all campus departments and undergraduate colleges, and topics vary from quarter to quarter. Enrollment is limited to fifteen to twenty students, with preference given to entering freshmen. Prerequisites: none.. A seminar format discussion led by CSE faculty on topics in central areas of computer science, concentrating on the relation among them, recent developments, and future directions. Prerequisites: majors only.. This course will improve students’ ability to read and write technical English and write software. Students will write short papers responding to a CSE-related book, learn the basics of functional programming, and do a project using a functional language. Prerequisites: CSE 12.. Independent reading or research by special arrangement with a faculty member. Prerequisites: lower-division standing. Completion of thirty units at UC San Diego with a UC San Diego GPA of 3.0. Special Studies form required. Department stamp required. Consent of instructor and approval of the department.. High-performance data structures and supporting algorithms. Use and implementation of data structures like (un)balanced trees, graphs, priority queues, and hash tables. Also memory management, pointers, recursion. Theoretical and practical performance analysis, both average case and amortized. Uses C++ and STL. Credit not offered for both Math 176 and CSE 100. Equivalent to Math 176. Prerequisites: CSE 12, CSE 21 or Math 15B, or consent of instructor.. Design and analysis of efficient algorithms with emphasis of nonnumerical algorithms such as sorting, searching, pattern matching, and graph and network algorithms. Measuring complexity of algorithms, time and storage. NP-complete problems. Credit not offered for both Math 188 and CSE 101. Equivalent to Math 188. Prerequisites: CSE 12, CSE 21 or Math 15B, or Math 100A, or Math 103A and CSE 100, or Math 176. Majors only.. Distributions over the real line. Independence, expectation, conditional expectation, mean, variance. Hypothesis testing. Learning classifiers. Distributions over R^n, covariance matrix. Binomial, Poisson distributions. Chernoff bound. Entropy. Compression. Arithmetic coding. Maximal likelihood estimation. Bayesian estimation. CSE 103 is not duplicate credit for ECE 109, Econ 120A, or Math 183. Prerequisites: Math 20A and Math 20B.. An introduction to the mathematical theory of computability. Formal languages. Finite automata and regular expression. Push-down automata and context-free languages. Computable or recursive functions: Turing machines, the halting problem. Undecidability. Credit not offered for both Math 166 and CSE 105. Equivalent to Math 166. Prerequisites: CSE 12, CSE 21 or Math 15B, or Math 100A, or Math 103A.. Topics include private and public-key cryptography, block ciphers, data encryption, authentication, key distribution and certification, pseudorandom number generators, design and analysis of protocols, zero-knowledge proofs, and advanced protocols. Emphasizes rigorous mathematical approach including formal definitions of security goals and proofs of protocol security. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or Math 15B, CSE 101 or Math 188, CSE 105 or Math 166.. Introduction to software development and engineering methods, including specification, design, implementation, testing, and process. An emphasis on team development, agile methods, and use of tools such as IDE’s, version control, and test harnesses. CSE 70 is renumbered to CSE 110: students may not receive credit for both CSE 70 and CSE 110. Prerequisites: CSE 12, CSE 21, or Math 15B.. Introduction to object-oriented analysis and design. Object-oriented modeling methods for analysis and design, object-oriented general design paradigms, object-oriented design techniques. Cyclic development of object-oriented systems. Prerequisites: CSE 70 or CSE 110.. This course will cover software engineering topics associated with large systems development such as requirements and specifications, testing and maintenance, and design. Specific attention will be given to development tools and automated support environments. Prerequisites: CSE 111.. Errors, resulting in defects and ultimately system failure, occur in engineering and also other areas such as medical care. The ways in which failures occur, and the means for their prevention, mitigation, and management will be studied. Emphasis will be on software systems but also include the study of practice of other areas. Prerequistes: CSE 12 and CSE 21.. Explores emerging opportunities enabled by cheap sensors and networked computing devices. Small research projects will be conducted in teams, culminating in project presentations at the end of the term. Section will cover material relevant to the project, such as research methods, software engineering, teamwork, and project management. Prerequisites: any course from the following: CSE 131, CSE 132B, Cog Sci 102C, Cog Sci 121, Cog Sci 184, ECE 111, ECE 118, ECE 191, ECE 192, COMM 102C, or ICAM; or consent of instructor.. Basic functions of operating systems; basic kernel structure, concurrency, memory management, virtual memory, file systems, process scheduling, security and protection. Prerequisites: CSE 30, and CSE 101 or Math 188, and CSE 70 or CSE 110.. (Formerly CSE 171B.) Case study of architecture and implementation of a selected modern operating system. In-depth analysis through a detailed study of source code. Topics include process creation, context-switching, memory allocation, synchronization mechanisms, interprocess communication, I/O buffering, device drivers, and file systems. Prerequisites: CSE 120.. (Renumbered from CSE 123A.) Introduction to concepts, principles, and practice of computer communication networks with examples from existing architectures, protocols, and standards with special emphasis on the Internet protocols. Layering and the OSI model; physical and data link layers; local and wide area networks; datagrams and virtual circuits; routing and congestion control; internetworking. Transport protocols. Credit may not be received for both CSE 123A and 158A, or CSE 123B and 158B. Prerequisites: CSE 120 or consent of instructor. Majors only.. (Renumbered from CSE 123B.) The architecture of modern networked services, including data center design, enterprise storage, fault tolerance, and load balancing. Protocol software structuring, the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP), remote procedure calls, protocols for digital audio and video communication, overlay and peer-to-peer systems, secure communication. Credit may not be received for both CSE 124 and ECE 158B. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 123B and CSE 124. Prerequisites: CSE 120 or consent of instructor. Majors only.. Design and implementation of large, complex software systems involving multiple aspects of CSE curriculum. Emphasis is on software system design applied to a single, large group project with close interaction with instructor. Prerequisites: senior standing with substantial programming experience, and consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. Topics include basic cryptography, security/threat analysis, access control, auditing, security models, distributed systems security, and theory behind common attack and defense techniques. The class will go over formal models as well as the bits and bytes of security exploits. Prerequisites: CSE 21 or Math 15B, and CSE 120.. (Formerly CSE 173.) Introduction to programming languages and paradigms, the components that comprise them, and the principles of language design, all through the analysis and comparison of a variety of languages (e.g., Pascal, Ada, C++, PROLOG, ML.) Will involve programming in most languages studied. Prerequisites: CSE 12, and CSE 100 or Math 176, CSE 105 or Math 166.. (Formerly CSE 131B.) Introduction to the compilation of programming languages, practice of lexical and syntactic analysis, symbol tables, syntax-directed translation, type checking, code generation, optimization, interpretation, and compiler structure. (Students may receive repeat credit for CSE 131A and CSE 131B by completing CSE 131.) Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176, CSE 105 or Math 166, CSE 110, and CSE 130.. Basic concepts of databases, including data modeling, relational databases, query languages, optimization, dependencies, schema design, and concurrency control. Exposure to one or several commercial database systems. Advanced topics such as deductive and object-oriented databases, time allowing. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176.. Design of databases, transactions, use of trigger facilities and datablades. Performance measuring, organization of index structures. Prerequisites: CSE 132A or equivalent.. Design and implementation of interactive World Wide Web clients using helper applications and plug-ins. The main language covered will be Java. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176. Majors only.. Design and implementation of dynamic web-based applications. Multitier architecture, scripting languages, SQL, XML, session handling, nonbrowser clients, web services, and scalability, security, and usability in the web context. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176. Majors only.. Design and implementation of large-scale web-based applications. Modeling organizational needs, design and revision management, J2EE or similar software platforms, web and application server functionality, reuse of object-oriented components, model-view-controller and other design patterns, clustering, load-balancing, fault-tolerance, authentication, usage accounting. Prerequisites: CSE 135.. (Formerly CSE 170A) Design of Boolean logic and finite state machines; two-level, multilevel combinational logic design, combinational modules and modular networks, Mealy and Moore machines, analysis and synthesis of canonical forms, sequential modules. Prerequisites: CSE 20 or Math 15A, and corequisite of CSE 140L.. (Formerly CSE 175B) Implementation with computer-aided design tools for combinational logic minimization and state machine synthesis. Hardware construction of a small digital system. Prerequisites: CSE 20, CSE 30. CSE 140 must be taken concurrently.. Introduction to computer architecture. Computer system design. Processor design. Control design. Memory systems. Prerequisites: CSE 140, CSE 140L, or consent of the instructor. CSE 141L should be taken concurrently. Majors only.. Hands-on computer architecture project aiming to familiarize students with instruction set architecture, and design of process. Control and memory systems. Prerequisites: CSE 140, CSE 140L, or consent of the instructor. CSE 141 should be taken concurrently. Majors only.. VSLI process technologies; circuit characterization; logic design styles; clocking strategies; computer-aided design tools; subsystem design; design case studies. System design project from hardware description, logic synthesis, physical layout to design verification. Students may not receive credit for both CSE 143 and ECE 161B. Prerequisites: CSE 140 and CSE 141.. Introduction to computer-aided design. Placement, assignment and floor planning techniques. Routing. Symbolic layout and compaction. Module generation and silicon compilation. Prerequisites: CSE 140 and CSE 140L.. Project class building an embedded computing system. Learn fundamental knowledge of microcontrollers, sensors, and actuators. Introduction to the hardware and software tools to build project in a team environment and end-to-end system building. Prerequisites: CSE 30.. Fault models and tests, combinational circuit test generation, fault collapsing, fault simulation, synchronous sequential circuit testing, functional testing, memory testing. Prerequisites: CSE 140 and CSE 140L, or consent of instructor.. Students will use hardware description language tools to add advanced architectural features to a basic processor design. These features may include pipelining, superscalar execution, branch prediction, and advanced cache features. Designs will be implemented in programmable logic devices. Prerequisites: CSE 141, CSE 141L, or consent of instructor.. Search algorithms including BFS, DFS, iterative deepening and A*, randomized search algorithms including Walksat, syntax and semantics of first-order logic (FOL), knowledge representation in FOL including reasoning, basic reasoning with probabilities, basic Bayesian learning. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176, or consent of instructors.. Reasoning with probabilities, reasoning and learning with Bayesian networks, decision making under uncertainty, sequential decision making, statistical learning methods, and reinforcement learning. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176, or consent of instructor.. The goal of computer vision is to compute scene and object properties from images and video. This introductory course includes feature detection, image segmentation, motion estimation, object recognition, and 3-D shape reconstruction through stereo, photometric stereo, and structure from motion. Prerequisites: Math 20F, CSE 100 or Math 176, CSE 101 or Math 188.. Introduction to high performance parallel computing: parallel architecture, algorithms, software, and problem-solving techniques. Areas covered: Flynns’ taxonomy, processor-memory organizations, shared and nonshared memory models: message passing and multithreading, data parallelism; speedup, efficiency and Amdahl’s law, communication and synchronization, isoefficiency and scalability. Assignments given to provide practical experience. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176.. Principles of image formation, analysis, and representation. Image enhancement, restoration, and segmentation; stochastic image models. Filter design, sampling, Fourier and wavelet transforms. Selected applications in computer graphics and machine vision. Prerequisites: Math 20F, CSE 100 or Math 176.. (Formerly CSE 177) Representation and manipulation of pictorial data. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional transformations, curves, surfaces. Projection, illumination, and shading models. Raster and vector graphic I/O devices; retained-mode and immediate-mode graphics software systems and applications. Prerequisites: Math 2EA/20F and CSE 100 or Math 176.. Weekly programming assignments that will cover graphics rendering algorithms. During the course the students will learn about ray tracing, geometry, tessellation, acceleration structures, sampling, filtering, shading models, and advanced topics such as global illumination and programmable graphics hardware. Prerequisites: CSE 167 or concurrent enrollment.. Advanced graphics focusing on the programming techniques involved in computer animation. Algorithms and approaches for both character animation and physically based animation. Particular subjects may include skeletons, skinning, key framing, facial animation, inverse kinematics, locomotion, motion capture, video game animation, particle systems, rigid bodies, clothing, and hair. Prerequisites: a good understanding of linear algebra. CSE 167 or consent of instructor.. This course covers the analysis of nucleic acid and protein sequences, with an emphasis on the application of algorithms to biological problems. Topics include sequence alignments, database searching, comparative genomics, and phylogenetic and clustering analyses. Pairwise alignment, multiple alignment, DNS sequencing, scoring functions, fast database search, comparative genomics, clustering, phylogenetic trees, gene finding/DNA statistics. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176, CSE 101 or Math 188, BIMM 100 or Chem 114D. Bioinformatics majors only. CSE 181 is cross-listed with BIMM 181 and BENG 181.. This course provides an introduction to the features of biological data, how that data are organized efficiently in databases, and how existing data resources can be utilized to solve a variety of biological problems. Relational databases, object oriented databases, ontologies, data modeling and description, survey of current biological database with respect to above, implementation of a database focused on a biological topic. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or Math 176. Bioinformatics majors only. CSE 182 is cross-listed with BIMM 182, Chem 182, and BENG 182.. This advanced course covers the application of machine learning and modeling techniques to biological systems. Topics include gene structure, recognition of DNA and protein sequence patterns, classification, and protein structure prediction. Pattern discovery, Hidden Markov models/support victor machines/neural network/profiles. Protein structure prediction, functional characterization or proteins, functional genomics/proteomics, metabolic pathways/gene networks. Prerequisites: BIMM 181 or BENG 181 or CSE 181, BIMM 182 or CSE 182 or CHEM 182. Bioinformatics majors only. CSE 184 is cross-listed with BIMM 184, BENG 184, and Chem 184.. Topics of special interest in computer science and engineering. Topics may vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit with the consent of instructor. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. A seminar course on topics of current interest. Students, as well as, the instructor will be actively involved in running the course/class. This course cannot be counted toward a technical elective. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. Teaching and tutorial assistance in a CSE course under the supervision of the instructor. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the department chair. Department stamp required.. Directed study and research at laboratories away from the campus. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor and approval of the department. Department stamp required.. Computer science and engineering topics whose study involves reading and discussion by a small group of students under the supervision of a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor. Department stamp required.. Independent reading or research by special arrangement with a faculty member. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of the instructor. Department stamp required.. Computability review, including halting problem, decidable sets, r.e. sets, many-one reductions; TIME(t(n)), SPACE(s(n)) and general relations between these classes; L, P, PSPACE, NP; NP—completeness; hierarchy theorems; RP, BPP. Prerequisites: CSE 105 or equivalent.. The basic techniques for the design and analysis of algorithms. Divide-and-conquer, dynamic programming, data structures, graph search, algebraic problems, randomized algorithms, lower bounds, probabilistic analysis, parallel algorithms. Prerequisites: CSE 101 or equivalent.. Modern advances in design and analysis of algorithms. Exact syllabus varies. Topics include approximation, randomized algorithms, probabilistic analysis, heuristics, online algorithms, competitive analysis, models of memory hierarchy, parallel algorithms, number-theoretic algorithms, cryptanalysis, computational geometry, computational biology, network algorithms, VLSI CAD algorithms. Prerequisites: CSE 202.. (Formerly CSE 208D) Mathematical logic as a tool in computer science. Propositional logic, resolution, first-order logic, completeness and incompleteness theorems with computational viewpoint, finite model theory, descriptive complexity, logic programming, nonmonotonic reasoning, temporal logic. Applications to databases, automatic theorem proving, program verification, and distributed systems. Prerequisites: CSE 200 or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 207C) Introduction to the algorithmic theory of point lattices (aka algorithmic geometry of numbers), and some of its most important applications in cryptography and cryptanalysis. Topics usually include: LLL basis reduction algorithm, cryptanalysis of broadcast RSA, hardness of approximating lattice problems. Prerequisites: CSE 202, CSE 200, or concurrent.. Private and public key cryptography, introduction to reduction based proofs of security, concrete security, block ciphers, pseudorandom functions and generators, symmetric encryption, asymmetric encryption, computational number theory, RSA and discrete log systems, message authentication, digital signatures, key distribution and key management. Prerequisites: CSE 202 or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 206A (see above).. Zero-knowledge, secure computation, session-key distribution, protocols, electronic payment, one-way functions, trapdoor permutations, pseudorandom bit generators, hardcore bits. Prerequisites: CSE 202, CSE 200, and CSE 207 or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 205A (see above).. Topics of special interest in algorithms, complexity, and logic to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Topics of special interest in cryptography to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 264A.) General principles in modern software engineering. Both theoretical and practical topics are covered. Theoretical topics include proofs of correctness, programming language semantics, and theory of testing. Practical topics include structured programming, modularization techniques, design of languages for reliable programming, and software tools. Prerequisites: CSE 100, 131A, 120, or consent of instructor.. Survey of testing and analysis methods. Introduction to advanced topics in area as well as traditional production methods. Topics include inspections and reviews, formal analysis, verification and validation standards, nonstatistical testing, statistical-testing and reliability models, coverage methods, testing and analysis tools, and organization management and planning. Methods special to special development approaches such as object-oriented testing will also be described. Prerequisites: undergraduate major in computer science or extensive industrial experience.. This course will cover a current topic in software engineering in depth. Topics in the past have included software tools, impacts of programming language design, and software system structure. (S/U grades permitted.) Prerequisites: none.. Operating system structures, concurrent computation models, scheduling, synchronization mechanisms, address spaces, memory management protection and security, buffering, streams, data-copying reduction techniques, file systems, naming, caching, disk organization, mapped files, remote file systems, case studies of major operating systems. Prerequisites: CSE 120 and 121, or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 222A (see below).. (Formerly CSE 222.) Computer communication network concepts, protocols, and architectures, with an emphasis on an analysis of algorithms, protocols, and design methodologies. Topics will include layering, error control, flow control, congestion control, switching and routing, quality of service management, mobility, naming, security, and selected contemporary topics. Prerequisites: CSE 123A or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 228H.) Techniques for speeding up Internet implementations, including system restructuring, new algorithms, and hardware innovations. Topics include: models for protocols, systems and hardware; efficiency principles; applying these principles to deriving techniques for efficient implementation of common endnode and router functions. Prerequisites: CSE 123A or CSE 222A, or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 223A (see below).. (Formerly CSE 223.) Logical and physical time, snapshot protocols, failure models, replication strategies, consensus and reliable broadcast, self-stabilization, atomic commit. Prerequisites: CSE 221 or consent of instructor.. Efficient primitives for distributed operating systems and high-performance network servers, including concurrent and event-driven server architectures, remote procedure calls, and load shedding. Distributed naming, directory, and storage services, replication for fault tolerance, and security in distributed systems. Prerequisites: CSE 221, CSE 222A, or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 228B.) Secondary and tertiary storage systems, optical and magnetic media, performance analysis, modeling, reliability, redundant arrays of inexpensive disks, striping, log and maximum distance separable data organizations, sparing. Prerequisites: CSE 221 or consent of instructor.. Security and threat models, risk analysis, authentication and authorization, auditing, operating systems security, access control mechanisms, protection mechanisms, distributed systems/network security, security architecture, electronic commerce security mechanisms, security evaluation. Prerequisites: CSE 221 or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 226 (see above).. Renumbered to CSE 222B (see above).. Discussion on problems of current research interest in computer systems. Possible areas of focus include: distributed computing, computational grid, operating systems, fault-tolerant computing, storage systems, system services for the World Wide Web. Topics to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Discussion on problems of current research interest in computer networks and communication. Possible areas of focus include: wide-area networking, wireless networks, the Internet, computational grid, operating systems, fault-tolerant computing, storage systems. Topics to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Discussion on problems of current research interest in computer security. Topics to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 273.) Functional versus imperative programming. Type systems and polymorphism; the ML language. Higher order functions, lazy evaluation. Abstract versus concrete syntax, structural and well-founded induction. The lambda calculus, reduction strategies, combinators. Denotational semantics, elementary domain theory. Prerequisites: CSE 130 or equivalent, or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 264C.) Advanced material in programming languages and translator systems. Topics include compilers, code optimization, and debugging interpreters. Prerequisites: CSE 100, 131A–B, or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 264D.) Database models including relational, hierarchic, and network approaches. Implementation of databases including query languages and system architectures. Prerequisites: CSE 100 or consent of instructor.. A hands-on approach to the principles of databases implementation. Algebraic rewriters/optimizers, query processors, triggers. Beyond centralized relational databases. Prerequisites: CSE 232.. Theory of databases. Theory of query languages, dependency theory, deductive databases, incomplete information, complex objects, object-oriented databases, and more. Connections to logic and complexity theory including finite model theory and descriptive complexity. Prerequisites: CSE 200.. Embedded system technologies including processors, DSP, memory, and software. System interfacing basics, communication strategies, sensors, and actuators. Mobile and wireless technology in embedded systems. Using predesigned hardware and software components. Design case studies in wireless, multimedia, and/or networking domains. Prerequisites: basic courses in digital hardware, algorithms and data structures, elementary calculus, and probability; or consent of instructor.. Embedded computing elements, device interfaces, time-critical IO handling. Embedded software design under size, performance, and reliability constraints. Software timing and functional validation. Programming methods and compilation for embeddable software. Embedded runtime systems. Case studies of real-time software systems. Prerequisites: CSE 237A; or basic courses in programming, algorithms and data structures, elementary calculus, discrete math, computer architecture; or consent of instructor.. Embedded system building blocks including IP cores. Cosimulation. Formal verification using model checking. Verification environments. Test challenges in core integration: compliance, feature, random, and collision testing. Core access and test integration. Interface-based verification and standards. Prerequisites: CSE 237A; or basic courses in algorithms and data structures, elementary calculus, discrete math, symbolic logic, computer architecture; or consent of instructor.. System representation and modeling. Abstract and language models. Simulation as a modeling activity. Computational and hw/sw system prototypes. System analysis using models. Constraint and interface modeling. Behavioral compilation and synthesis. Prerequisites: CSE 237A; or basic courses in digital logic design, algorithms and data structures, elementary calculus, discrete math, symbolic logic, computer architecture; or consent of instructor.. Discussion on problems of current research interest in databases. Possible areas of focus include: core database issues, data management on the web, data integration, new database models and applications, formal methods in databases. Topics to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 240A (see below).. (Formerly CSE 240.) This course will cover fundamental concepts in computer architecture. Topics include instruction set architecture, pipelining, pipeline hazards, bypassing, dynamic scheduling, branch prediction, superscalar issue, memory-hierarchy design, advanced cache architectures, and multiprocessor architecture issues. Prerequisites: CSE 141 or consent of instructor.. This course covers advanced topics in parallel computer architecture, including on-chip and off-chip interconnection networks, cache coherence, cache consistency, hardware multithreading, multi-core and tiled architectures. It incorporates the latest research and development on parallel architectures and compilation techniques for those architectures. CSE 240A recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing.. This course covers advanced topics in computer architecture. It incorporates the latest research and development on topics such as branch prediction, instruction-level parallelism, cache hierarchy design, speculative multithreading, reliable architectures, and power-management techniques. CSE 240A recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing.. This course covers advanced topics in design concepts and implementation principles of application specific processors, including embedded system design principles and application specific processors, application specific instruction set processors, domain specific processor architectures, embedded memories and dynamically customizable processors. CSE 240A recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing.. VLSI integrated-circuit building blocks of computing systems, and their implementation. Computer-aided design and performance simulations, design exercises and projects. Devices, standard cells and interconnects, clocking, power/ground distribution, arithmetic modules, memories. Methodologies and tradeoffs in system implementation. Prerequisites: layout (CSE 165 or ECE 260A) and logic design (CSE 140 or ECE 111), or consent of instructor.. Couplings among timing, circuits and spatial embedding in nanometer-scale CMOS design. The role, and key problems, of physical layout in IC implementation. Example topics: RTL-to-GDSII methodologies, analyses and estimations, partitioning, floor planning, placement, routing, special net routing, cell generation, compaction. Prerequisites: CSE 241A or consent of instructor.. Hardware software co-design, architectural level synthesis, control synthesis and optimization, scheduling, binding, register and bus sharing, interconnect design, module selection, combinational logic optimization, state minimization, state encoding, and retiming. Prerequisites: CSE 241A or consent of instructor.. Design for test, testing economics, defects, failures and faults, fault models, fault simulation, automatic test pattern generation, functional testing, memory, PLA, FPGA, microprocessor test, and fault diagnosis. Prerequisites: CSE 241A or consent of instructor.. This course is about the computer algorithms, techniques, and theory used in the simulation and verification of electrical circuits. Prerequisites: CSE 241A or consent of instructor.. This course covers architecture concepts used to tailor processors to a specific application or sets of applications. It covers Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), various forms of Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) designs, Application Specific Integrated Processors (ASIP), and augmenting customizable VHDL cores. Prerequisites: CSE 241A or consent of instructor.. Algorithmic techniques and optimization frameworks for large-scale, difficult optimizations. Primal-dual multicommodity flow approximations, approximations for geometric and graph Steiner formulations, continuous placement optimization, heuristics for Boolean satisfiability, multilevel methods, semidefinite programming, and application to other formulations (e.g., scheduling). Prerequisites: CSE 241A or CSE 242A, or consent of instructor.. Topics of special interest in computer architecture to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Topics of special interest in VLSI to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Topics of special interest in CAD to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Heuristic search algorithms including A*, constraint satisfaction algorithms including DPLL, randomized search, knowledge representation in first-order logic (FOL), resolution methods for reasoning in FOL, reasoning about action and planning, reasoning with Bayesian networks. CSE 101 recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing in CSE or consent of instructor.. Classifier learning including linear separators, decision trees, and nearest neighbors. Generalization and overfitting; design of learning experiments; the PAC model. Possible topics include ensemble methods, boosting, kernel methods, online learning, and reinforcement learning. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. Comprehensive introduction to computer vision providing broad coverage including low-level vision (image formation, photometry, color, image feature detection), inferring 3-D properties from images (shape-from shading, stereo vision, motion interpretation) and object recognition. Companion to CSE 252B covering complementary topics. Prerequisites: Math 10D and Math 20A–F or equivalent.. Comprehensive introduction to computer vision providing focused coverage of multiview geometry, structure from motion, image segmentation, motion segmentation, texture analysis and recognition, object detection, and image-based rendering. Companion to CSE 252A covering complementary topics. Prerequisites: Math 10D and Math 20A–F or equivalent.. Selected topics in computer vision and statistical pattern recognition, with an emphasis on recent developments. Possible topics include: grouping and segmentation, object recognition and tracking, multiple view geometry, kernel-based methods, dimensionality reduction, and mixture models. Prerequisites: CSE 252 or equivalent and CSE 250B or equivalent.. Learning algorithms based on statistics. Possible topics include minimum-variance unbiased estimators, maximum likelihood estimation, likelihood ratio tests, resampling methods, linear logistic regression, feature selection, regularization, dimensionality reduction, manifold detection. An upper-division undergraduate course on probability and statistics such as Math 183 or 186, or any graduate course on statistics, pattern recognition, or machine learning is recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing.. Introduction to modern statistical approaches to natural language processing: part-of-speech tagging, word-sense disambiguation and parsing, using Markov models, hidden Markov models and probabilistic context-free grammars. Recommended: one of LIGN 165, LIGN 245, CSE 151, CSE 250A, CSE 254. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. Computational methods are indispensable to an understanding of the vast datasets emerging from human and other organisms’ genomes. This course surveys algorithms underlying genome analysis, sequence alignment, phylogenetic trees, protein folding, gene expression, metabolic pathways, and biological knowledge base design. Prerequisites: Pharm 201 or consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 206B (see above).. Connectionist models and a sampling of other cognitive modeling techniques. Models of language processing, memory, sequential processes, and vision. Areas covered may vary depending on student and faculty interests. Can be repeated for credit. CSE 151 or CSE 250B or CSE 253 or CSE 254, or equivalent experience recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing.. A weekly meeting featuring local (and occasional external) speakers discussing their current research in Artificial Intelligence Neural Networks, and Genetic Algorithms. (S/U grades only.) Prerequisites: none.. Topics of special interest in machine learning to be presented by faculty and students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 274A.) This course provides an overview of parallel hardware, algorithms, models, and software. Topics include Flynn’s taxonomy, interconnection networks, memory organization, a survey of commercially available multiprocessors, parallel algorithm paradigms and complexity criteria, parallel programming environments and tools for parallel debugging, language specification, mapping, performance, etc. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. This course will explore design of software support for applications of parallel computation. Topics include: programming languages, run time support, portability, and load balancing. The course will terminate in a project. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Computer graphics techniques for creating realistic images. Topics include ray tracing, global illumination, subsurface scattering, and participating media. CSE 168 or equivalent recommended.. Selected topics in computer graphics, with an emphasis on recent developments. Possible topics include computer animation, shape modeling and analysis, image synthesis, appearance modeling, and real-time rendering. CSE 168 or CSE 169 recommended. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 206B.) The course focuses on algorithmic aspects of modern bioinformatics and covers the following topics: computational gene hunting, sequencing, DNA arrays, sequence comparison, pattern discovery in DNA, genome rearrangements, molecular evolution, computational proteomics, and others. Prerequisites: CSE 202 preferred or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 257A/BENG 202.) Introduction to methods for sequence analysis. Applications to genome and proteome sequences. Protein structure, sequence-structure analysis. Prerequisites: Pharm 201 or consent of instructor.. Annotating genomes, characterizing functional genes, profiling, reconstructing pathways. Prerequisites: Pharm 201, BENG 202/CSE 282, or consent of instructor.. (Formerly CSE 280A.) A seminar course in which topics of special interest in computer science and engineering will be presented by staff members and graduate students under faculty direction. Topics vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit. (S/U grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (Offered as faculty resources permit.). (Formerly CSE 281A). Topics of interest in computer science and engineering. Topics may vary from quarter to quarter. May be repeated for credit with the consent of instructor. (S/U grades permitted.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor. (Offered as faculty resources permit.). (Formerly CSE 282.) Computer science and engineering faculty will present one-hour seminars of the current research work in their areas of interest. Prerequisites: CSE graduate status.. The student will conceive, design, and execute a project in computer science under the direction of a faculty member. The project will typically include a large programming or hardware design task, but other types of projects are possible. Prerequisites: CSE graduate student status. (CS 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81) (S/U grades only.). Advanced study and analysis of active research in computer science and computer engineering. Discussion of current research and literature in the research specialty of the staff member teaching the course. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Open to properly qualified graduate students who wish to pursue a problem through advanced study under the direction of a member of the staff. (S/U grades only.) Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Research. Prerequisites: consent of faculty.. A course in which teaching assistants are aided in learning proper teaching methods by means of supervision of their work by the faculty: handling of discussions, preparation and grading of examinations and other written exercises, and student relations. May be used to meet teaching experience requirement for candidates for the PhD degree. Number of units for credit depends on number of hours devoted to class or section assistance. Prerequisites: graduate standing and consent of instructor.. Renumbered to CSE 500 (see above).. Training in teaching methods in the field of computer science. This course examines theoretical and practical communication and teaching techniques particularly appropriate to computer science. Prerequisites: consent of faculty..  A year-long lower-division course that will provide students with a background in United States history from colonial times to the present, concentrating on social, economic, and political developments. (Satisfies Muir College humanities requirement and American History and Institutions requirement.). Lectures and discussions surveying the topics of race, slavery, demographic patterns, ethnic variety, rural and urban life in the U.S.A., with special focus on European, Asian, and Mexican immigration.. A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be slavery, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.. A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the Asian-American and white ethnic groups, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.. A lecture-discussion course on the comparative ethnic history of the United States. Of central concern will be the Mexican-American, race, oppression, mass migrations, ethnicity, city life in industrial America, and power and protest in modern America.. A lower-division survey that compares and contrasts the development of China and Japan from ancient times to the present. Themes include the nature of traditional East Asian society and culture, East Asian responses to political and economic challenges posed by an industrialized West, and war, revolution and modernization in the twentieth century.. The evolution of East Asian civilization from the first writing through classical Hei’an Japan and late imperial Song China. Primary and secondary readings on basic ideas, institutions and practices of the Confucian, Daoist, and Buddhist paths and of the state and family.. From the Mongol conquests to China’s last dynasty and Japan’s annexation of Korea, this course examines political, institutional, and cultural ruptures and continuities as the East Asian countries responded to the challenges of Western imperialism with defense, reform, conservative reaction and creative imitation.. Examines the emergence of a regionally dominant Japan before and after World War II; the process of revolution and state-building in China during the Nationalist and Communist eras; and Korea’s encounter with colonialism, nationalism, war, revolution and industrialization.. Students watch films on Latin America and compare them to historical research on similar episodes or issues. Films will vary each year but will focus on the social and psychological consequences of colonialism, forced labor, religious beliefs, and “Modernization.”. Explores the history of public health, from the plague hospitals of Renaissance Italy to the current and future prospects for global health initiatives, emphasizing the complex biological, cultural, and social dimensions of health, sickness, and medicine across time and space.. A survey of African history dealing with the European scramble for territory, primary resistance movements, the rise of nationalism and the response of metropolitan powers, the transfer of power, self-rule and military coups, and the quest for identity and unity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. West Africa from the nineteenth century onwards and examines the broad outlines of historical developments in the sub-region through the twentieth century, including such themes as religious, political, and social changes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Examines the traumas, interrelation, and global repercussions of national conflicts (‘small wars’) in the postcolonial world. Focus on Africa and Asia from the Cold War to the present with particular attention to the intersection of foreign interests, insurgency, and geopolitics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent.. The origins and the interaction between the peoples of South Africa. Special attention will be devoted to industrial development, urbanization, African and Afrikaner nationalism, and the origin and development of apartheid and its consequences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A study of the meaning, structure, and sources of African traditional religion. The course examines the attitudes of mind and belief and practices that have evolved in many societies in Africa.. Plant and animal domestication, ironworking and the distribution of ethnic/language groups, urbanization, regional and long-distance commerce, and the rise of medieval kingdoms. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. This colloquium is intended for students with sufficient background in African history. Topics, which vary from year to year, will include traditional political, economic, and religious systems, and theory and practice of indirect rule, decolonization, African socialism, and pan-Africanism. Department stamp required.. Directed readings for undergraduates. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and academic adviser required.. Covers important political issues—such as the medieval decentralization of state power, unification in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the Tokugawa system of rule, and conflicts between rulers and ruled—while examining long-term changes in economy, society, and culture. +. Topics include the Meiji Restoration, nationalism, industrialization, imperialism, Taisho Democracy, and the Occupation. Special attention will be given to the costs as well as benefits of “modernization” and the relations between dominant and subordinated cultures and groups within Japan.. Lecture-discussion course approaching the 1931–1945 war through various “local,” rather than simply national, experiences. Perspectives examined include those of marginalized groups within Japan, Japanese Americans, Pacific Islanders, and other elites and nonelites in Asian and Pacific settings.. Examines social, cultural, political, and economic transformations and continuities in Japan since World War II. Emphases will differ by instructor. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Japanese culture and society changed dramatically during the twentieth century. This course will focus on the transformation of cultural codes into what we know as “Japanese,” the politics of culture, and the interaction between individuals and society.. Survey of relations between Japan and the United States in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Although the focus will be on these nation-states, the course will be framed within the global transformation of societies. Topics include cultural frameworks, political and economic changes, colonialism and imperialism, and migration.. By examining the roles of ghosts in Japanese belief systems in a nonscientific age, this course addresses topics including folk beliefs and ghost stories, religiosity, early science, tools of amelioration and authoritative knowledge, and the relationship between myth and history. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Historical, social, and cultural relationships between religion and popular culture. Secularization of culture through images, worldviews, and concepts of right and wrong that may either derive from, or pose challenges to, the major East Asian religions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. The relation of social, political, and economic developments to the philosophical and religious traditions of China c. 1200 BC to 400 AD, including Confucianism, Daoism, Legalism, correlative cosmology, and ideas about fate, spirits, and health. Previous course work on China helpful but not required. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Using primary and secondary sources, we survey the interactions of ideas and institutions in the commercial economy of China from the tenth through the eighteenth centuries, and consider their impact on the lives of individuals. Previous course work on China helpful but not required. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Narrates the history of the Ming dynasty. Explores the worldview and experiences of Ming men and women from the emperor and scholar-officials down to farmers and riff-raff, through translated primary and accessible secondary sources on politics, religion, family, economy, etc. Recommended preparation: HILD 11. + . The impact of modern transformations on female roles and gender relations in China, Japan, and Korea, focusing on the late imperial/early modern periods through the twentieth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent.. This course studies the peoples, cultures, religions, economics, arts, and technologies of the trade routes known collectively as the Silk Road from c. 200 BCE to 1000 CE. We will use an interdisciplinary approach. Primary sources will include written texts and visual materials. We will examine these trade routes as an early example of globalization. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Introduction to material culture in China from a historical perspective. Consider Chinese primary sources (including both historical texts and objects) from the point of view of the new interdisciplinary field of material culture studies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Through the biographies and autobiographies of prominent and ordinary men and women from antiquity to today, this course explores the relation of the individual to social structures, class and gender in personal experience, and the production of primary and secondary sources. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. From the Opium War to the 1911 Revolution. Key topics include ethnic identity under Manchu rule, the impact of Western imperialism, the Taiping and other rebellions, overseas Chinese, social change and currents of reform, and the rise of Chinese nationalism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. An exploration of the formative period of the twentieth-century Chinese Revolution: the New Culture Movement, modern urban culture, the nature of Nationalist (Guomindang) rule, war with Japan, revolutionary nationalism, and the Chinese Communist rise to power. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent.. This course analyzes the history of the PRC from 1949 to the present. Special emphasis is placed on the problem of postrevolutionary institutionalization, the role of ideology, the tension between city and countryside, Maoism, the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution.. This course looks at how the historical problems of twentieth-century China are treated in the popular and elite cultures of the Nationalist and Communist eras. Special emphasis is placed on film and fiction. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Course will take up one of the main traditions of Chinese thought or religion , Confucianism, and trace it from its origins to the present. The course will explain the system of thought and trace it as it changes through history and within human lives and institutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent. +. Course will take up one of the main traditions of Chinese thought or religion, Buddhism, and trace it from its origins to the present. The course will explain the system of thought and trace it as it changes through history and within human lives and institutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent. +. Course will take up one of the main traditions of Chinese thought or religion, Daoism, and trace it from its origins to the present. The course will explain the system of thought and trace it as it changes through history and within human lives and institutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent. +. The course explores the institutions of family and marriage, and women’s roles and experiences within the family and beyond, from classical times to the early twentieth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Examines women’s roles and experiences in the twentieth-century Chinese revolution, the ways in which women participated in the process of historical change, the question of to what extent the revolution “liberated” women from “Confucian tradition.” Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Selected topics in East Asian History. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.. This course examines Korea’s entrance into the modern world.  It utilizes both textual and audio-visual materials to explore local engagements with global phenomenon, such as imperialism, nationalism, capitalism, and socialism.  HILD 10, 11, and/or 12 recommended. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course traces the peninsula’s division into two rival regimes.  It utilizes both textual and audio-visual materials to reveal the varied experiences of North and South Koreans with authoritarianism, industrialization, and globalization. HILD 10, 11, and/or 12 recommended. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This colloquium will explore the relationship between cinema and society in twentieth-century China. The emphasis will be on the social, political, and cultural impact of filmmaking. The specific period under examination (1930s, 1940s, post-1949) may vary each quarter. Graduate students will be expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Pairs primary sources with scholarship built on them to illuminate later imperial state, society, and individual lives, and to show how historians generate and answer questions. Topics vary; may be repeated for credit. Graduate students will be expected to submit an additional paper or project. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +. The Ming (1368–1644) is often considered expanding Europe’s opposite: absolutist, closed, and stagnant. Reading new scholarship in conjunction with its primary sources, we’ll explore the period’s dynamic politics and competitive society, and the production of historical knowledge. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. This seminar examines various domestic and international issues in Chinese history from 1800 to recent times. When topics vary, may be repeated for credit. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work or an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Chinese society, thought, religion, culture, economy and politics from the Shang through the Song dynasties, through primary and secondary sources. Topics vary; may be repeated for credit. Requirements differ for undergraduate, MA and PhD students. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work or an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor and department stamp. +. Explores premodern Chinese society and culture through the reading and discussion of classics and masterpieces in history. Examines how values and ideas were represented in the texts and how they differed, developed, or shifted over time. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing, department stamp. +. This colloquium will examine selected topics in modern Korean history through both primary sources (in translation) and secondary sources. Topics will vary year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and departmental stamp.. Directed reading for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor required.. The social, political, and cultural history of the ancient Greek world from the Persian Wars to the death of Alexander the Great (480–323 BC). +. The social, political, and cultural history of the ancient Greek world from the earliest settlements to the empire of Alexander the Great (c. 2000–323 BC). Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. A survey course of the history of the Byzantine state from the reign of Constantine to the fall of Constantinople. This course will emphasize the importance of the Byzantine state within a larger European focus, its relationship to the emerging Arab states, its political and cultural contributions to Russia and the late medieval west. +. This course is devoted to the Early Byzantine Empire from Constantine through the challenges and transformations of the seventh century, examining the rise and triumph of Christianity, war, diplomacy, the rise of Islam, climate change, epidemic and natural disasters. Students cannot receive credit for both HIEU 104 and HIEU 104A. Recommended preparation: HIEU 105. +. This course covers the Middle Byzantine Empire from the seventh to the eleventh century, examining the impact of Islam; Iconoclasm; the conversion of the Slavs and the rise of Bulgaria and Russia; religious and intellectual developments; court culture and ceremonial. Students cannot receive credit for both HIEU 104 and HIEU 104B. Recommended preparation: HIEU 104A. +. This course covers the Later Byzantine Empire from the eleventh through the fifteenth century, examining the eleventh century crisis; the rise of the West and the Crusades; the Komnenian revolution; Slavic empires; the Palaiologan Renaissance; Mongols and Ottomans; the Byzantine diaspora. Students cannot receive credit for both HIEU 104 and HIEU 104C. Recommended preparation: HIEU 104A and/or HIEU 104B. +. A study of the origin and development of early Christian thought, literature, and institution from the New Testament period to the Council of Chalcedon. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course will explore the history of nationalism as idea and political movement in European history, from the French Revolution to the present. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. The development of European society and culture from the decline of the Roman Empire to 1050. Prerequisites: Humanities sequence.. The development of European society and culture from 1050 to 1400. Prerequisites: Humanities sequence or its equivalent. +. This class examines medieval history through the lens of hagiography and biography. Such texts provide intimate views of the culture, including: family and social structures; attitudes towards the supernatural; the body, gender, and aging; peace and violence; hierarchy and dissent. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. The course studies conflict resolution in Europe during the ninth to thirteenth centuries when governments were too weak to enforce norms of peace and order. We will read medieval literature and histories and anthropological accounts of conflict resolution in stateless societies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent. +. The year 2000 provokes questions about the transformation of time, culture, and society. Taking the year 1000 as a touchstone, this class examines the history of apocalyptic expectations in the Middle Ages through a close scrutiny of both texts and art. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course examines the history of the Greek Diaspora in Canada, South America, Australia, and Africa from 1700 to the present. Special attention is paid to the Greek migration to North America during the twentieth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1350–1683). Topics covered: the rise of the Ottoman Empire, conquest of the Balkans, the Ottoman system of rule, religious life, rural and urban society, law and order, and material culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1683–1914). Topics covered: social and economic development in the eighteenth century, nationalism, independence wars, state-nation formation, interstate relations, the Eastern Question, rural society, urbanization, emigration, and the Balkan Wars. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course examines the history of Greece and the Balkans (1914–2001). Topics covered: World War I, population exchanges, authoritarianism, modernization, World War II, resistance, civil wars, Cold War, Greek-Turkish relations, Cyprus, collapse of Communism, 1990s conflicts, and EU expansion. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Examines problems surrounding the transfer of American culture, values, and styles to Europe in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Topics may include: consumer society, popular culture, commercial and business practices, “McDonaldization,” political and military influence, democratization, and resistance to Americanization. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 117S and HIEU 118. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The social, political, and cultural transformation of late-medieval Italy from the heyday of mercantile expansion before the plague to the dissolution of the Italian state system with the French invasions of 1494. Special focus upon family, associational life and factionalism in the city, the development of the techniques of capitalist accumulation, and the spread of humanism. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. The intellectual and social history of the Reformation and Counter-Reformation from the French invasions to the Edict of Nantes. Emphasis is upon reform from below and above, the transformation of grass-roots spirituality into institutional control. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Course will begin with a survey of the major empires of the fifteenth century, concentrating on the links between them. It will then examine the entrance of Europeans on the global scene in the sixteenth century. This part of the course will examine European/ non-European encounters, focusing on perceptions, economic interaction, and institutional adaptation and will emphasize the Hispanic American, Ottoman, and Indian Ocean cases. +. This course looks at the phenomenon of sport in all of its social, cultural, political, and economic aspects. The starting point will be the emergence of modern sport in nineteenth-century Britain, but the focus will be global. Since the approach will be topical rather than chronological, students should already have a good knowledge of world history in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. An analysis of European history since the end of the Second World War. Focus is on political, social, economic, and cultural developments within European societies as well as on Europe’s relationship with the wider world (the Cold War, decolonization).. This course surveys the historical and cultural significance of Paris from about 1500 to the present. The focus is on interactions between political, architectural, and urban evolutions, and the changing populations of Paris in times of war, revolutions, and peace. +. A lecture-discussion course focusing on Europe from 1688 to 1789. Emphasis is on the social, cultural, and intellectual history of France, Germany, and England. Topics considered will include family life, urban and rural production and unrest, the poor, absolutism, and the Enlightenment from Voltaire to Rousseau. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. This course examines the Revolution in France and its impact in Europe and the Caribbean. Special emphasis will be given to the origins of the Revolution, the development of political and popular radicalism and symbolism from 1789 to 1794, the role of political participants (e.g., women, sans-culottes, Robespierre), and the legacy of revolutionary wars and the Napeoleonic system on Europe. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. How Germany, from being a maze of tiny states rife with religious conflict, became a nation. Did the nations-building process lead to Nazism? Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course discusses sex and gender at the end of the classical period and its development into the Middle Ages in both Eastern and Western Mediterranean. Course will examine the ways in which our medieval predecessors assigned gender traits and relationships to members of society. It will approach the topic in part through an examination of the language used about gender and in part through use of modern gender theories. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. State-building and imperial expansion among the peoples of the East Slavic lands of Europe and Asia from the origins of the Russian state in ninth-century Kiev, through Peter the Great’s empire up to the middle of the nineteenth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course investigates the social history of crime, criminal justice, and policing in Europe between approximately 1700 and 1900. The topic enables historians to investigate a variety of issues, including state-formation, gender relations, and class relations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A lecture and discussion course on European political and cultural development and theory from 1870–1989. Important writings will be considered both as responses to and as provocations for political and cultural change.. This course surveys the age of colonialism in the nineteenth and twentieth century. The course will focus on the debates on colonialism in the metropolis as well as on the conflicts inside the colonies. Considerable emphasis will be placed on colonialism in Africa. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The rise and decline of Spain’s European empire from Ferdinand and Isabella to 1700. The revival of Spain and her return to European affairs in the eighteenth century. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or graduate standing. +. European imperialism, alliances, and the outbreak of the First World War. The postwar settlement and its breakdown. The advent of Hitler and the disarray of the western democracies. The Second World War and the emergence of the super powers.. European thought from the late Enlightenment and the French Revolution to Marx and Baudelaire, emphasizing the origins of romanticism, idealism, and positivism in England, Germany, and France. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A lecture-discussion course on the crisis of bourgeois culture, the redefinition of Marxist ideology, and the transformation of modern social theory. Readings will include Nietzsche, Sorel, Weber, Freud, and Musil. (This course satisfies the minor in the Humanities Program.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Selected topics in European history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. We will study historical accounts, memoirs, diaries, and oral histories to master the Holocaust epoch. We will contrast scholarly narratives to personal experience as different ways to learn about the past. Students will design projects for public education. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A consideration of the political, social, and cultural crisis that faced Western liberal democracies in the interwar period, with emphasis on the mass movements that opposed bourgeois liberalism from both the left and the right.. This course examines the history of European women and gender issues from about 1500 to 1700. Three major themes are covered: intellectual and cultural trends; the nature of the human body and work roles; and, spiritual beliefs, experiences, and practices. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course examines the image and the reality of women in the period from 200–1500. We will focus upon the ambivalent status of women in this period as “internal others” to medieval—simultaneously necessary to the functioning of society, yet viewed as marginal to its interests or even as outsiders. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or instructor consent. +. This course examines European women and gender issues from about 1700 to 1871. Major themes covered are: intellectual and cultural trends (e.g., education and politics); attitudes toward female and male bodies and work roles; and, spiritual beliefs and practices. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course explores the history of women across classes from 1870 to the present, with an emphasis on the variety of women’s experience and the efforts towards and obstacles to empowerment. Topics include: women and the state, science and gender, feminist movements and the evolution of women’s work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Emphasis on changes in social structure and corresponding shifts in political power. The expansion and the end of empire. Two World Wars and the erosion of economic leadership. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Social, political, cultural history of Spain since Napoleon. Features second Spanish Republic, the Civil War, Franco era, and transition to democracy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Examines how ordinary citizens coped with the problems of life under Europe’s authoritarian regimes. Topics may include Nazism, fascism, and quasi-fascist societies (e.g., Franco’s Spain, Salazar’s Portugal), and communist practice from Leninism to Stalinism to the milder Titoism of Yugoslavia. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Selected topics in modern European history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topic vary.  Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. An analysis of the volatile course of German history from unification to the collapse of the Nazi dictatorship. Focus is on domestic developments inside Germany as well as on their impact on European and global politics in the twentieth century.. This course explores war, revolution, development, and terror in the Soviet Union from 1905–1991. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Comparative examination of the relationship between religious commitments and legal norms in Europe from the Reformation to the present. Topics may include government sponsorship; religious expression; conflicts with secular law; religious rights as human rights; and religious and cultural politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Why did Germany in 1919 produce an Adolf Hitler; how did the Nazis take power in 1933; and why did the Third Reich last until 1945? Why did the war against the Jews become industrial and absolute? Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. For centuries the land of Israel was present in Jewish minds and hearts. Why and how did the return to Zion become a reality? Which were the vicissitudes of Jewish life in Palestine? Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A seminar focusing on selected topics in Greek history from the Bronze Age to the Roman Conquest. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Intensive study of special problems or periods in the history of medieval Europe. Topics vary from year to year, and students may therefore repeat the course for credit. Prerequisites: background in European history and upper-division standing. +. Between 1400 and 1700 Europeans spread around the world. This course looks at the personal, face-to-face ways in which Europeans survived and prospered in early modern Asia, Africa, and Latin America—religious conversion, intermarriage, collaboration, coercion. Graduate students are expected to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. Department stamp required. +. This course alternates with HIEU 170. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: background in European history.. This course will be a comparative and thematic examination of the fascist movement and regimes in Europe from the 1920s to the 1940s. In particular, it will focus on the emergence of the two major fascist movements in Italy and Germany. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and departmental stamp.. An examination of how traditional moral concerns and human compassion came to be abandoned and how the mass murder of the Jews was organized and carried out. The focus of this course will be on the perpetrators. Requirements will vary for undergraduate MA and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. This seminar addresses Jewish civic autonomy in the late medieval era, the terms of emancipation in the European states, the politics of Jewish socialists, the costs of assimilation, and the consequences of a successful Zionist state in 1948. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and departmental stamp.. Topics will vary from year to year. (Satisfies the Humanities Program minor.) Prerequisites: background in European history.. Topics will vary from year to year. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Comparative study of immigration and migration in Europe since 1945. Topics include (im)migrant adaptation, assimilation, and identity; labor systems, opposition to and regulation of migration; competing concepts of nationality and citizenship, conflicts over Muslim immigration; and implications for European integration. Students may not receive credit for both HIEU 181/281 and ERC 101. Graduate students will be expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Comparative study of Islam in Europe since 1945. Topics include: indigenous populations; immigration; Islamic law/church-state questions; EU expansion/integration; gender issues; terrorism; Islamophobia; “Europeanizing” Islam; the historical tradition of European-Muslim encounter and its present political/cultural issues. Graduate students will be required to do an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. This seminar examines the social history and anthropology of the Mediterranean. Topics covered are: the Mediterranean debate, rural economy, peasant society, gender relations, honor and shame, rural violence, class formation, and emigration. The seminar introduces the methodology of historical anthropology. Graduate students will be expected to complete an additional paper or project. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Examines the multi-ethnic Yugoslav states that existed from 1918 until the 1990s. Topics include inter-ethnic relations, foreign affairs, Tito’s revisionist communism, the consumerist Yugoslav Dream, culture and society, the violent break-up of the 1990s, and the post-Yugoslav order. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Directed group study on European history under the supervision of a member of the faculty on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of at least ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego G.P.A. of 2.95, a completed and approved Special Studies form, and department stamp.. Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Lecture-discussion survey of Latin America from the pre-Columbian era to 1825. It addresses such issues as the nature of indigenous cultures, the implanting of colonial institutions, native resistance and adaptations, late colonial growth and the onset of independence. +. Lecture-discussion survey of Latin America in the nineteenth century. It addresses such issues as the collapse of colonial practices in the society and economy as well as the creation of national governments, political instability, disparities among regions within particular countries, and of economies oriented toward the export of goods to Europe and the United States.. This course surveys the history of the region by focusing on two interrelated phenomena: the absence of democracy in most nations and the region’s economic dependence on more advanced countries, especially the United States. Among the topics discussed will be the Mexican Revolution, the military in politics, labor movements, the wars in Central America, liberation theology, and the current debt crisis. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A political, economic, and social examination of the causes and consequences of the Mexican, Cuban, and Nicaraguan revolutions. Also examine guerrilla movements that failed to gain power in their respective countries, namely the Shinning Path in Peru, FARC in Colombia, and the Zapatistas in Mexico. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Study of the economic and social problems of the Andean region from the colonial period until the crisis of 1912, with special attention to theoretical models to explain the processes of change. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Examination of the historical roots of population problems, social conflict, and revolution in Latin America, with emphasis on man-land relationships. Special emphasis on modern reform efforts and on Mexico, Cuba, Brazil, and Argentina. Lecture, discussion, reading, and films. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. How did dictatorships come about? Who were the authoritarian leaders? How did they organize their regimes and what were the consequences? Recent publications on dictators in Latin America allow for comparisons across countries and throughout time to answer those questions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A survey of the development of urban forms of Latin America and of the role that cities played in the region as administrative and economic centers. After a brief survey of pre-Columbian centers, the lectures will trace the development of cities as outposts of the Iberian empires and as “city-states” that formed the nuclei of new nations after 1810. The course concentrates primarily on the cities of South America, but some references will be made to Mexico City. It ends with a discussion of modern social ills and Third World urbanization. Lima, Santiago de Chile, Buenos Aires, Rio de Janeiro, and Sao Paulo are its principal examples. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. From coffee boom through rebellion, militarization, revolution, state terrorism, and migration, the U.S. has loomed large in the history of El Salvador. This course explores this relationship from 1920 to the present through the prisms of revolution and human rights. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A survey from the colonial period to the present, with an emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Among the topics covered: the expansion of the frontier, the creation of a cosmopolitan, predominately European culture, and the failure of industrialization to provide an economic basis for democracy. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. From colonial times to the present, with an emphasis on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Among the topics covered: the evolution of a slave-based economy, the key differences among regions, the military in politics, and the creation of the most populous and industrialized country in Latin America. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. This course will discuss transformations in Brazilian society from 1808 to 1904, covering the Independence, the Empire, end of slavery, beginning of a Republican system, modernization, social protests, popular culture, nation building, and changes in the politics of social dominance. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A lecture-discussion course on the historical roots of revolutionary Cuba, with special emphasis on the impact of the United States on the island’s development and society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A broad historical overview of Hispanic-American women’s history focusing on issues of gender, sexuality, and the family as they relate to women, as well as the historiographical issues in Latin American and Chicana women’s history. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Exploration of the relationships between socioeconomic and cultural development in Caribbean history; slavery and empire; nationalism and migration; vodun and Rastafarianism, and the literary arts. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A century of Mexican history, 1821–1924: the quest for political unity and economic solvency, the forging of a nationality, the Gilded Age and aftermath, the ambivalent Revolution of Zapata and his enemies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The paradox of a conservative state as heir to a legendary social upheaval, with special emphasis on the mural art renaissance, the school crusade, the economic dilemma, and the failure to eradicate poverty and inequality. Lectures and discussion. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Topics will vary from year to year or quarter to quarter. May be repeated for an infinite number of times due to the nature of the content of the course always changing. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The course surveys Chile’s basic developments beginning with the era of nitrate exports. Students will have the opportunity to address a specific issue of his/her own choosing and develop the topic for class presentation and a final paper. Graduate students are expected to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the colonial period from Spanish and Portuguese conquests to the Wars of Independence. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MS, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp. +. Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the nineteenth century: world economy, nation-state building, agrarian processes, incipient industrialization, political and cultural thought, and social structure. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp.. Introduction to the historiography on Latin America for the twentieth century: agrarian reforms, unionization, industrialization by import substitution, the political left, social development, and international relations. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students are required to submit an additional research paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor; reading knowledge of Spanish; department stamp.. Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department stamp.. The history and literature of ancient Israel c. 1300 to 300 BCE. Reading from the Bible, historical and archaeological surveys, and studies of authorship. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Based on biblical and nonbiblical sources, a reconstruction of Israelite institutions, beliefs, and practices and their evolution over time. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Course will trace the political and cultural history of Mesopotamia (modern Iraq), beginning with rise of cities in the fourth millennium BCE, continuing through the Sumerian, Akkadian, Assyrian, and Babylonian periods, and ending with the fall of Babylon (539 BCE). Prerequisites: upper-division or instructor consent. +. The Jews in Israel from the sixth century BCE to the seventh century CE. Statehood, nationalism, and autonomy within the framework of the Persian empire, the Hellenistic kingdoms, and the Roman-Byzantine empire. Cultural and religious developments will be explored. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. The Jews outside their homeland and in pre-Islamic times, concentrating on the Greco-Roman West and the Parthian-Sasanian East. Topics include assimilation and survival; anti-Semitism and missionizing; patterns of organization and autonomy; cultural and religious developments. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. This course covers the four books of the Latter Prophets, including Isaiah, Ezekiel, and Jeremiah, and the twelve minor prophets. It will study the social context of Israelite prophecy, cross-cultural parallels, the relationship of the prophets to other biblical literature, and the historical context in which each prophet wrote. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The peoples, politics, and cultures of Southwest Asia and Egypt from the sixth century BCE to the seventh century CE. The Achemenid Empire, the Ptolemaic and Seleucid kingdoms, the Roman Orient, the Parthian and Sasanian states. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Continued study of the language of the Bible with emphasis on advanced grammar and vocabulary. Prerequisites: HINE 109A. Offered during the summer.. This course approaches the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) from the perspective of cultural anthropology. Institutions studied will include the family, rites of passage, food taboos, warfare, animism, demons, sorcery, and animal sacrifice. Prerequisites: upper-division or instructor consent. Not offered in 2008–09. +. A close reading of select prose narratives from the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Students with advanced Hebrew can study the texts in HINE 112A in the original language. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A close reading of select poetic passages from the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Students with advanced Hebrew can study the texts in HINE 112B in the original language. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Course will analyze and compare major myths from Egypt, Israel, Ugarit, and Mesopotamia, employing a variety of modern approaches. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. A survey of the Middle East from the rise of Islam to the region’s economic, political, and cultural integration into the West (mid-nineteenth century). Emphasis on socioeconomic and political change in the early Arab empires and the Ottoman state. +. Examines the contacts of the late Ottoman Empire and Qajar Iran with Europe from the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt to World War I, the diverse facets of the relationship with the West, and the reshaping of the institutions of the Islamic states and societies.. An introduction to the history of the Middle East since 1914. Themes such as nationalism, imperialism, the oil revolution, and religious revivalism will be treated within a broad chronological and comparative framework drawing on the experience of selected countries.. An examination of post-WWII Middle East conflicts, including the Israeli-Arab conflicts, the Lebanese Civil War, and the Gulf War of the 1980s. The roles of the superpowers and Middle Eastern states during the period.. Islamic formulations of dissent from the nineteenth century to our day; social, cultural, and political movements inflected by religion; domestic, interregional, and international dimensions with emphasis on the Arab East, Iran, and Turkey. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A survey of nationalism in the modern Middle East with reference to current theories of identity formation in Europe and South Asia. The course will examine shifting identities in the Ottoman Empire, its Turkish and Arab successor states, and Iran. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Iran’s social and political history in the twentieth century with emphasis on the Constitutional movement of the late Qajar period, formation and development of the Pahlavi state, anatomy of the 1978–79 Revolution, and a survey of the Islamic Republic. Prerequisites: upper-division or instructor consent.. Eastern problems on the example of Turkey and with special attention to collective identities, state-society dynamics, foreign and regional policies, and varieties of modernity. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Principles of historical linguistics, application to the languages of the ancient Levant. Prerequisites: knowledge of at least one Semitic language; a course in general linguistics is also desirable. +. Decipherment of Ugaritic tablets, history, and culture of ancient Ugarit, study of Ugaritic mythic texts. +. Students study cuneiform script and elements of Babylonian-Assyrian grammar, as well as the history of Ancient Mesopotamia. +. Systematic reading and rendering of the books of the Hebrew Bible in order. Each time the class is taught, we will look at a different book. Adequate knowledge of Biblical Hebrew is required. Graduate students will have to write an extra paper or exam. Prerequisites: Judaic Studies 103, graduate standing, or consent of instructor. +. This course approaches the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament) from the perspective of cultural anthropology. Institutions studied will include the family, rites of passage, food taboos, warfare, animism, demons, sorcery, and animal sacrifice. Formerly HINE 111; students may not receive credit for HINE 111 and HINE 162/262. Graduate students will be required to complete an extra paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp. +. Topics on the ancient world will vary from year to year. Requirements will vary for undergraduate and graduate students. Graduate students will submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and departmental stamp. +. Growth of nationalism in relation to imperialism, religion, and revolution in the nineteenth- and twentieth-century Middle East. Emergence of cultural and political ethnic consciousness in the Ottoman state. Comparative study of Arab, Iranian, and Turkish nationalism as well as Zionism. Prerequisites: department stamp or consent of instructor.. This course studies a period or theme in Jewish history. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: department stamp required.. Focused study of historical roots of contemporary problems in the Middle East: Islamic modernism and Islamist movements; contacts with the West; ethnic and religious minorities; role of the military; economic resources and development. Department stamp and permission of instructor.. Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. Styles of the medieval scientific imagination. Reception and assimilation of the learning of the ancient world, especially Aristotle, Plato, Euclid, Galen, and Ptolemy. Struggles to reconcile Greek, Arabic, and Christian ideals of knowledge. Rise of universities. Natural philosophy, logic, geometry, optics, astronomy, astrology, mechanics, geography, and classification of living beings. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Technology as an agent of change. How have humans harnessed the power of nature? What factors have contributed to successes and failures? How has technology changed human life? How should we evaluate the quality of these changes? Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. History of women’s struggles and strategies for access and equality in professional science. Questions related to gender bias in science—as a social institution and as an epistemological enterprise—will be addressed in light of the historical and biographical readings. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Historical aspects of the popularization of science. The changing relation between expert science and popular understanding. The reciprocal impact of scientific discoveries and theories, and popular conceptions of the natural world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. History of human effects on the natural environment, with emphasis on understanding the roles of the physical and biological sciences in providing insights into environmental processes. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A cultural history of the formation of early modern science in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries: the social forms of scientific life; the construction and meaning of the new cosmologies from Copernicus to Newton; the science of politics and the politics of science; the origins of experimental practice; how Sir Isaac Newton restored law and order to the West. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. The development of the modern conception of the sciences, and of the modern social and institutional structure of scientific activity, chiefly in Europe, during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. The history of twentieth-century life sciences, with an emphasis on the way in which model organisms such as fruit flies, guinea pigs, bacteriophage, and zebra fish shaped the quest to unlock the secrets of heredity, evolution, and development. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. An introduction to scientific thought as it relates to Western culture. Among the topics considered: Aristotelian, medieval, and Renaissance science; the scientific revolution; the Newtonian universe; science and the Enlightenment; evolution; science and the modern state; technoscience and biotechnology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Development of nuclear science and weapons—1930s to present—including the discovery of radioactivity and fission, the Manhattan project, the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and end of WWII, the H-bomb, and legacies of nuclear proliferation, environmental damage, and radioactive waste. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection, and its scientific, intellectual, and political legacies. Topics include social Darwinism, eugenics, Nazi racial hygiene, population control, neo-Malthusianism in the modern environmental movement. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Explores the origin of clinical method, the hospital, internal surgery, and the medical laboratory, as well as the historical roots of debates over health-care reform, genetic determinism, and the medicalization of society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The story behind the postwar rise of bioethics—medical scandals breaking in the mass media, the development of novel technologies for saving and prolonging life, the emergence of new diseases, the unprecedented scope for manipulation opened up by biology. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A survey of the history of the neurosciences from the seventeenth century to the present, exploring the political, philosophical, cultural, aesthetic and ethical aspects of research into the workings of the human brain. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Analyzes the history of sexology as a series of episodes in the science of human difference, from the European reception of the first translation of the Kama Sutra in 1883 to the search for the “gay gene” in the 1990s. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The role of technology in American history through the Civil War. Indigenous and colonial development, transportation infrastructures, and industrialization are explored to understand the connections among technology, society, and culture. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Major technological developments in the twentieth century, including the rise and decline of technologies, unexpected hazards and unanticipated consequences, and why some technologies fail. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Science and law are two of the most powerful establishments of modern Western culture. Science organizes our knowledge of the world; law directs our action in it. Will explore the historical roots of the interplay between them. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. Selected topics in the history of science. Course can be taken for credit up to three times as topics will vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Major recent publications in the history of science will be discussed and analyzed; the topics will range in period from the seventeenth century to the twentieth, and will deal with all major branches of natural science. Special topics. Topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. This course focuses on the single most important figure of the scientific revolution, Isaac Newton, and on his science and philosophy which set the frame of reference for physics and general science until the twentieth century. Graduate students are required to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. The complex historical development of human understanding of global climate change, including key scientific work, and the cultural dimensions of proof and persuasion. Special emphasis on the differential political acceptance of the scientific evidence in the U.S. and the world. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing. Department stamp required.. This seminar explores topics at the interface of science, technology, and culture, from the late nineteenth century to the present. Topics change yearly; may be repeated for credit with instructor’s permission. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Galileo’s condemnation by the Catholic Church in 1633 is a well-known but misunderstood episode. Was Galileo punished for holding dangerous scientific views? Personal arrogance? Disobedience? Religious transgressions? Readings in original sources, recent historical interpretations. Graduate students will be expected to submit a more substantial piece of work. +. Why have women been traditionally excluded from science? How has this affected scientific knowledge? How have scientists constructed gendered representations not only of women, but also of science and nature? We will address these questions from perspectives including history, philosophy, and psychoanalytic theory. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Examines evolutionary theory before Darwin, the development of the theory of natural selection, the ongoing challenge from Lamarckism, nineteenth-century social Darwinism, the emergence of the neo-Darwinist synthesis, and the recent controversies over evolutionary psychology and creationism. Graduate students are expected to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. From the beginnings of brain anatomy in the 1660s to the current rage for functional magnetic resonance imaging studies, this class investigates philosophical, ethical, and cultural dimensions of the quest to localize psychological phenomena in the physical brain. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. A critical analysis of the host of “historical sciences” that developed over the course of the long nineteenth century, from archaeology and paleontology to psychoanalysis and craniotomy, including the science of history itself. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. In 1784, Kant asked, “What is Enlightenment?” In this course we will pursue this question, which has remained hotly debated ever since. Prerequisites: upper-division standing and department stamp.. This course will explore the evolution of the institutions, ideologies, procedures, standards, and expertise that modern democratic societies have used in applying science to generate and legitimate public policy.. Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. A seminar intended for exposing undergraduate students, especially freshmen, to exciting research programs conducted by department faculty. Enrollment is limited. Topic will vary quarter by quarter.. Independent study for undergraduates with lower-division standing under the supervision of a member of the faculty on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. Prerequisites: lower-division standing, completion of thirty units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum UC San Diego GPA of 3.0, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.. The political and cultural history of the Jews through the early modern period. Life under ancient empires, Christianity and Islam. The post-biblical development of the Jewish religion and its eventual crystallization into the classical, rabbinic model. +. Topics include the political emancipation of the Jews of Europe; the emergence of Reform, Conservative, and Modern Orthodox Judaism; Hasidism; modern anti-Semitism; Jewish socialism; Zionism; the Holocaust; the American Jewish community; the State of Israel.. Jewish women’s experiences from the seventeenth century to the present, covering Europe, the United States, and Israel. We examine work, marriage, motherhood, spirituality, education, community, and politics across three centuries and three continents. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A survey and examination of the principal writings of Marx concerning economic theory and analysis. Emphasis on the theory of value, production, technical change, reproduction and accumulation. Some consideration will also be made of certain neo-Marxist contributions and critiques. Prerequisites: introductory economics or consent of instructor.. This course examines the interaction between sections of the globe after 1200. It emphasizes factors operating on a transcontinental scale (disease, climate, migration) and historical/cultural phenomena that bridge distance (religion, trade, urban systems). This is not narrative history, but a study of developments that operated on a global scale and constituted the first phase of globalization. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Explores where human rights come from and what they mean by integrating them into a history of modern society, from the Conquest of the Americas and the origins of the Enlightenment, to the Holocaust and the contemporary human rights regime. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The course examines multiform mystical traditions in world religions and cultures, including Greco-Roman philosophy, Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Buddhism by studying classics of mystical literature and secondary sources; also addressed are mystical beliefs and practices in contemporary society.. This course will examine the different ways that attitudes toward children have changed throughout history. By focusing on the way that the child was understood, we will examine the changing role of the family, the role of culture in human development, and the impact of industrialization and modern institutions on the child and childhood.. An examination of the Second World War in Europe, Asia, and the United States. Focus will be on the domestic impact of the war on the belligerent countries as well as on the experiences of ordinary soldiers and civilians. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Comparative study of genocide and war crimes, stressing European developments since 1900 with reference to cases elsewhere. Topics include historical precedents; evolving legal concepts; and enforcement mechanisms. Emphasis on the Holocaust, the USSR under Stalin, ex-Yugoslavia, and the Armenian genocide. Students may not receive credit for both HITO 134 and ERC 102. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course will give an interdisciplinary introduction to anthropological thought in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Secondly, it will deal with different fields of historical anthropology. Central questions and approaches will be discussed by presenting selected case studies. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. An examination of the history of emotions from the early modern period to the present with a focus on Europe and North America. Analysis of different approaches to emotions as well as of specific emotions (love, honor, shame, fear, guilt). Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. From early modern witches, rebels, and heretics to hyper-modern gangsters, terrorists, and serial killers, applying capital punishment to foreign nationals and ethnic minorities has sustained a global conversation about the sanctity of human life and the meaning of citizenship in the Americas and Europe. Graduate students must complete an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. The course analyzes mutual influences and exchanges between the U.S. and Germany from the late nineteenth to the mid-twentieth century. Topics include imperialism and racism, social thought and intellectual migration, economic relations, feminism, and youth cultures, war, and occupation.. Reckoning by novelists, essayists, and biographers with the phenomenon of contemporary warfare as an unprecedented experience and an abiding threat. Graduate students are required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. The majority of the world’s citizens now live in cities; this course examines the evolution of housing architecture and finance in the twentieth-century context of rapid urbanization, dissolving empire, industrialization, and globalization. Graduate students will submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and consent of instructor.. The Senior Seminar Program is designed to allow senior undergraduates to meet with faculty members in a small group setting to explore an intellectual topic in history (at the upper-division level). Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Senior Seminars may be taken for credit up to four times, with a change in topic, and permission of the department. Enrollment is limited to twenty students, with preference given to seniors. Prerequisites: department stamp and/or consent of instructor.. Course attached to six-unit internship taken by student participating in the UCDC program. Involves weekly seminar meetings with faculty and teaching assistant and a substantial historical research paper. Prerequisites: department stamp required; participating in UCDC program.. A program of independent study providing candidates for history honors an opportunity to develop, in consultation with an adviser, a preliminary proposal for the honors essay. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of this quarter. A final grade will be given for both quarters at the end of HITO 195. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. Independent study under the supervision of a faculty member leading to the preparation of an honors essay. A letter grade for both HITO 194 and 195 will be given at the completion of this quarter. Prerequisites: consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. The nature and uses of history are explored through the study of the historian’s craft based on critical analysis of historical literature relating to selected topics of concern to all historians. Required of all candidates for history honors and open to other interested students with the instructor’s consent. Department stamp required.. Directed group study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing, completion of at least ninety units of UC San Diego undergraduate study, a minimum G.P.A. of 2.5, and a completed and approved Special Studies form.. Independent study on a topic not generally included in the regular curriculum. Students must make arrangements with individual faculty members. (P/NP grades only.) Prerequisites: upper-division standing and consent of instructor.. Political and social history of the thirteen colonies: European background, settlement and expansion, beginnings of culture, and the imperial context. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Causes and consequences of the revolution: intellectual and social change, the problems of the new nation, the Constitution, and the origins of political parties. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. The upheavals that transformed the early modern Atlantic emphasizing the United States, Caribbean, and Great Britain. Topics: struggles to define democracy, the reorganization of the Atlantic state system, the Enlightenment, and international responses to the American and French Revolutions. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. Examines foreign relations of the United States from acquisition of a formal overseas empire in the aftermath of the Spanish-American War to the end of the Cold War. Topics cover a range of public and private interactions with the world. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course will examine the transformation of American society and politics between the American Revolution and the Jacksonian period. Topics to be considered include the emergence of domesticity, the development of political parties, the expansion of capitalist relations, the debate over slavery, the early labor movement, and the origins and motivations of middle-class reform. +. This course examines the history of the Native Americans in the United States with emphasis on the lifeways, mores, warfare, cultural adaptation, and relations with the European colonial powers and the emerging United States until 1870. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course examines the history of the Native Americans in the United States with emphasis on the lifeways, mores, warfare, cultural adaptation, and relations with the United States from 1870 to the present. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. An exploration of cultural, political, religious, and social thought in early America. Emphasis will be placed on the trans-Atlantic context and on the relationships between intellectuals and authority. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course examines California history from 1800 onward, with an emphasis on social, economic, and political change. The course will explore the effect of national and international events as well as the ways in which California–the ideal and the real–shapes the American experience.. Constructions of sex and sexuality in the United States from the time of precontact Native America to the present, focusing on sexual behaviors, sexual ideologies, and the uses of sexuality for social control.. The connection between social relations and America’s wars. Ways that American society has influenced decisions to prepare for or go to war as well as the impact of war on class relations and ideologies of race and gender. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. This course examines the history of Los Angeles from the early nineteenth century to the present. Particular issues to be addressed include urbanization, ethnicity, politics, technological change, and cultural diversification.. Topics will include Quaker origins of the American peace movements and examples of opposition to wars in the twentieth century from World Wars I and II, Vietnam, anti-nuclear movements, and intervention in Central America to Iraq. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. A lecture-discussion course utilizing written texts and films to explore major themes in American politics and culture from the Great Depression through the 1990s. Topics will include the wars of America, McCarthyism, the counter-culture of the 1960s, and the transformation of race and gender relations. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. New York City breathes history. Whether it is in the music, the literature, or the architecture, the city informs our most basic conceptions of American identity. This course examines the evolution of Gotham from the colonial era to today. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Explore how Asian Americans were involved in the political, economic, and cultural formation of United States society. Topics include migration; labor systems; gender, sexuality and social organization; racial ideologies and anti-Asian movements; and nationalism and debates over citizenship.. Examines key periods, events, and processes throughout the twentieth century that shaped the way Americans thought about race. Also examines the historical development of the category of race and racism, as well as how it is lived in everyday life. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course will examine immigration to the United States and the role that gender, as a fundamental social category, shapes immigration. We focus on how gendered social structures, experiences, and networks have shaped the immigrant experience. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course sketches the shifting experience persons of African descent have had with the law in the United States. Films, cases, articles, and book excerpts are used to convey the complex nature of this four hundred year journey. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This class examines the history of racial and ethnic groups in American cities. It looks at major forces of change such as immigration to cities, political empowerment, and social movements, as well as urban policies such as housing segregation. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course will explore connections between American culture and the transformations of class relations, gender ideology, and political thought. Topics will include the transformations of religious perspectives and practices, republican art and architecture, artisan and working class culture, the changing place of art and artists in American society, antebellum reform movements, antislavery and proslavery thought. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. This course will focus on the transformation of work and leisure and the development of consumer culture. Students will consider connections between culture, class relations, gender ideology, and politics. Topics will include labor radicalism, Taylorism, the development of organized sports, the rise of department stores, the transformation of middle-class sexual morality, the growth of commercial entertainment, and the culture of the cold war.. This course considers how cultural processes have shaped histories of the Civil War and Reconstruction. Students will analyze the relationship between popular culture and major themes of the era through the use of literature, texts, film, television, and print. Students may not receive credit for both HIUS 132 and HIUS 132S. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This interdisciplinary lecture course focuses on the history and literature of global piracy in the English-speaking world from Sir Francis Drake to Blackbeard and how this Golden Age was remembered in the popular fiction of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Explore the politics of black culture in the postwar period. Topics include: the dynamic interplay of social factors (migration, civil rights, black power, deindustrialization, globalization) and the production of African American culture, including music, film, and literature. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course focuses on the role the Atlantic played in bringing together in both volatile and beneficial ways the remarkably different cultures of four continents from the Columbian Exchange to the Haitian Revolution. Students may not receive credit for HIUS 135 and 135A or 135B. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. The social, political, economic, and ideological pressures generated during the international conflicts of the twentieth century have had an enormous impact on American life. The course examines how the pressures of “total war” and “cold war” shaped the African-American experience in both war and peacetime. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course examines the transformation of African America across the expanse of the long twentieth century: imperialism, migration, urbanization, desegregation, and deindustrialization. Special emphasis will be placed on issues of culture, international relations, and urban politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. The United States as a raw materials producer, as an agrarian society, and as an industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and nineteenth- and early twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism.. The United States as modern industrial nation. Emphasis on the logic of the growth process, the social and political tensions accompanying expansion, and twentieth-century transformations of American capitalism.. Examines important constitutional, criminal, and civil trials in English and American courts from the early modern period to the present. The topics will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Examines the political, economic, and social history of the American people from the turn of the twentieth century to the end of World War II. Topics: progressive movement, impact of the Great Depression, and the consequences of two world wars. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Examines the political, economic and social history of the American people from the end of World War II to present. Topics: origins of the Cold War, struggle for racial justice and the rise of American conservatism since the 1980s. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Selected topics in US history. Course may be taken for credit up to three times as topics vary.  Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course will examine the economic, social, and political changes underway in the United States from 1917 to 1945. Topics will include the 1920s, the Great Depression, the New Deal and the consequences of two World Wars. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Examining the history of urban riots in the U.S. since the late nineteenth century. Exploring how different groups of Americans have constructed competing notions of race, gender, labor, and national belonging by participating in street violence. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This lecture explores the development of suburbs in America, from the early nineteenth century to the contemporary era. Topics include suburban formation, class, ethnic and racial dimensions, government influences, social life, and cultural responses to suburbia. The class will explore competing theories of suburbanization as it surveys the major literature.. This course focuses on the phenomenon of modern American urbanization. Case studies of individual cities will help illustrate the social, political, and environmental consequences of rapid urban expansion, as well as the ways in which urban problems have been dealt with historically.. An overview of the social and political developments that polarized American society in the tumultuous decade of the 1960s. Themes include the social impact of the postwar baby boom, the domestic and foreign policy implications of the Cold War; the evolution of the civil rights and women’s movements; and the transformation of American popular culture.. The history of American law and legal institutions. This quarter focuses on crime and punishment in the colonial era, the emergence of theories of popular sovereignty, the forging of the Constitution and American federalism, the relationship between law and economic change, and the crisis of slavery and Union. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. The history of American law and legal institutions. This course examines race relations and law, the rise of big business, the origins of the modern welfare state during the Great Depression, the crisis of civil liberties produced by two world wars and McCarthyism, and the Constitutional revolution wrought by the Warren Court. HIUS 150 is not a prerequisite for HIUS 151. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. The historical development of constitutional thought and practice in the United States from the era of the American Revolution through the Civil War, with special attention to the role of the Supreme Court under Chief Justices Marshall and Taney. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. The historical development of constitutional thought and practice in the United States since 1865, with special attention to the role of the Supreme Court from Chief Justices Chase to Rehnquist. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Survey of politicized criminal trials and impeachments from Colonial times to the 1880s. Examines politically motivated prosecutions and trials that became subjects of political controversy, were exploited by defendants for political purposes, or had their outcomes determined by political considerations. +. This course examines human interaction with the western American environment and explores the distinction between the objective environmental understanding of science and the subjective views of history and historians. The course will also analyze the most compelling environmental issues in the contemporary West.. Tracing popular cultural production and consumption in the U.S. since World War II. It historicizes popular culture as an arena where social relations are negotiated and where race, class, and gender identities are constructed, transformed, and contested. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Selected problems in the history of the relationship between religious beliefs and practice and legal institutions in the Anglo-American world. Topics include the English background, religion in the age of the American Revolution and the antebellum period. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. +. Selected problems in the history of the relationship between religious beliefs and practice and legal institutions in America from the Civil War to the present. Topics include the religion and government aid; sacred duties and the law; and religion and cultural politics. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course explores the emergence of a dominant ideology of womanhood in America in the early nineteenth century and contrasts the ideal with the historically diverse experience of women of different races and classes, from settlement to 1870. Topics include witchcraft, evangelicalism, cult of domesticity, sexuality, rise of industrial capitalism and the transformation of women’s work, Civil War, and the first feminist movement. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. This course explores the making of the ideology of womanhood in modern America and the diversity of American women’s experience from 1870 to the present. Topics include the suffrage movement, the struggle for reproductive rights and the ERA; immigrant and working-class women, women’s work, and labor organization; education, the modern feminist movement and the contemporary politics of reproduction, including abortion and surrogate motherhood. Prerequisites: upper-division standing. +. This course examines the history of the Spanish and Mexican borderlands (what became the US Southwest) from roughly 1400 to the end of the U.S.-Mexico War in 1848, focusing specifically on the area’s social, cultural, and political development. +. (Cross-listed as Ethnic Studies 131.) This course examines the history of the American Southwest from the U.S.-Mexican War in 1846–48 to the present, focusing on immigration, racial and ethnic conflict, and the growth of Chicano national identity.. Course explores the concept of an American Empire by examination of the literature on the topic. Particular attention will be on the work since 9/11/01. Students are expected to produce original work concerning the definition and/or existence of an American Empire. Graduate students are expected to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. This seminar will trace major themes in the history of the American West. Topics will include ethnicity, the environment, urbanization, demographics, and shifting concepts surrounding the significance of the West. Graduate students will be required to submit additional work in order to receive graduate credit for the course. Prerequisites: department stamp required.. Specific topics will vary from year to year, including slavery, Civil War and Reconstruction, the Afro-American experience, race relations. +. This colloquium studies the racial representation of Mexican Americans in the United States from the nineteenth century to the present, examining critically the theories and methods of the humanities and social sciences. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. The course investigates race, resistance, and culture in the U.S. since the late nineteenth century. It interrogates how working-class whites, African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, and others have simultaneously challenged, shaped, and assimilated into US society. Graduate students are required to submit an additional paper. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor. Department stamp required.. A reading and discussion course on topics that vary from year to year, including American federalism, the history of civil liberties, and the Supreme Court. Prerequisites: consent of instructor.. The specific content of the course will vary from year to year but will always analyze in depth a limited number of issues in American women´s history. Special topics. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, PhD students. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: consent of instructor or department stamp.. This seminar will explore the histories of sexual relations, politics, and cultures that both cross and define racial boundaries in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Reading will focus on the United States as well as take up studies sited in Canada and Latin America. Graduate students are expected to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. This course explains the origin of the Atlantic as a zone of interaction for Europeans, indigenous Americans, and Africans, and evaluates the consequences of the interaction over several centuries by exploring contests over political power and economic/demographic change. Graduate students will submit a more substantial piece of work with in-depth analysis and with an increased number of sources cited. A typical undergraduate paper would be ten pages, whereas a typical graduate paper would require engagement with primary sources, more extensive reading of secondary material, and be about twenty pages. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and departmental stamp. +. Comparative study of immigration and ethnic-group formation in the United States from 1880 to the present. Topics include immigrant adaptation, competing theories about the experiences of different ethnic groups, and the persistence of ethnic attachments in modern American society. Prerequisites: upper-division standing.. A colloquium dealing with special topics in US history from 1900 to the present. Themes will vary from year to year. Prerequisites: department stamp or consent of instructor.. A colloquium dealing with special topics in the history of people of African descent in the United States. Themes will vary from quarter to quarter. Requirements will vary for undergraduate, MA, and PhD students. Graduate students will be required to submit a more substantial piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. In this seminar, we will examine the shifting boundary between what constitutes a public and a private concern in twentieth-century US history. We will consider issues such as civil rights, immigration, health care, and the regulation of financial institutions. Prerequisites: department stamp required for HIUS 185. Instructor approval required for HIUS 285.. Selected topics in US economic history.  Course may be taken for credit a total of three times, as topics vary. Prerequisites: upper-division standing or consent of instructor.. Colloquium on selected topics in American social history. Topics will vary from year to year, and the course may therefore be repeated for credit.. Colloquium on select topics in culture and politics in the United States. Topics will vary from quarter to quarter. Graduate students will be required to submit an additional piece of work. Prerequisites: upper-division or graduate standing and department stamp.. Directed readings for undergraduates under the supervision of various faculty members. Prerequisites: consent of instructor and department stamp required.. An introductory graduate course for students in all fields. Themes include cross-field historiography and theory, interdisciplinary approaches to history and historical method. (May be taken twice for credit, if the reading list is significantly different.). Traces the history and idea of the university from its medieval origins, with emphasis on its post-WWII incarnation as an engine of scientific investigation, economic growth, socio-cultural analysis, and artistic experimentation. Research project will utilize original sources in UC San Diego’s archives. Students must complete both HIGR 204A and 204B in order to get credit for both. HIGR 204A focuses on the research portion of the class.. An introduction to feminist historical studies, this course is designed for interested graduate students from all history field groups. Graduate students from other disciplines are also encouraged to participate. The course will provide students a rigorous training in women’s history, in the feminist theories that undergird that scholarship, and in the emergent field of gender analysis. The particular content of the course will change from year to year, but each course will include theoretical texts, historical case studies, and primary sources. Readings will be drawn from different times and places. This course is strongly recommended for those preparing minor fields in women’s history. The course can be repeated twice for credit.. A transdisciplinary and comparative course on the interplay of nationalism, colonialism, and race (as well as class and gender/sexuality) in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.. This course will introduce students to the monographic literature and the main historiographic controversies of modern Chinese history.. This course will introduce students to the monographic literature and the main historiographic controversies of modern Japanese history.. This course will introduce students to the monographic literature and the main historiographic controversies of modern East Asian history.. An introduction to Chinese documentary sources and collections on Qing and Republican history. This course will introduce students to the language of Qing documents, and to the contents and uses of imperial documents and archives, documentary collections, periodicals, gazetteers, etc.. A two-quarter research seminar in Chinese history. A paper, based on original research, will be due in the second quarter. Seminar topics will vary. Reading knowledge of Chinese is expected. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 215A is a prerequisite for 215B.. A two-quarter research seminar in Japanese history. A paper, based on original research, will be due in the second quarter. Seminar topics will vary. Reading knowledge of Japanese is expected. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 216A is a prerequisite for 216B.. Ancient society differed dramatically from the imperial, bureaucratic, commercial, Buddhist China of later times. Yet the texts and artifacts of antiquity echoed powerfully through the centuries. We will study foundational texts, practices, and objects in their own contexts and also consider their later uses.. Course introduces history and society during the Chinese Middle Ages (c. 200 BCE–1200 CE), including the Han, Six, Tang, and Song Dynasties. Examination of the birth and development of China’s great religions, Buddhism and Daoism, and the international culture of the Silk Road, and political and cultural systems that still resonate in China today.. Course introduces major topics in scholarship on the Yuan, Ming, and Qing periods. It is intended to prepare graduate students to teach the history of late imperial China.. Course subject varies among periods before 1900. 218A includes secondary scholarship studied for content, method, and structure; research methods and resources; and development of the research topic. In 218B students write an original research paper using primary sources. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor. Reading knowledge of Chinese.. Course subject varies among periods before 1900. 218A includes secondary scholarship studied for content, method, and structure; research methods and resources; and development of the research topic. In 218B students write an original research paper using primary sources. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor. Reading knowledge of Chinese. HIGR 218A.. Introduction to the historiography on Renaissance, Reformation, and early modern Europe: an overview of methodologies with emphasis on sources and critical approaches. Required for all beginning European history graduate students.. Selected topics in European history from the early modern to the modern era. Readings and discussions focus on issues of methodology and interpretation. Required for all beginning European history graduate students.. Critical evaluation of selected topics in the period of modern Europe from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. Required for all beginning European history graduate students.. Students will read major works on revolutionary Russian and Soviet history. Attention will be paid to both classic and revisionist works.. Selected topics in the period from the sixteenth century through the early nineteenth, with an emphasis on the theory and practice of socioeconomic history. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 230A is a prerequisite for 230B.. Selected topics in the period of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 231A is a prerequisite for 231B.. A two-quarter research seminar comprising intensive study of a specific topic in the history of science. The first quarter will be devoted to readings and discussions; the second chiefly to the writing of individual research papers. Topics vary from year to year, and students may therefore repeat the course for credit. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter.. (Cross-listed with SIO 201.) Intensive study of specific problems in the history of the ocean sciences, and of related earth and atmospheric sciences, in the modern period. Topics vary from year to year, and students may therefore repeat the course for credit.. (Cross-listed as Communication 225A, Philosophy 209A, and Sociology 255A.) Study and discussion of classic work in history of science, sociology of science and philosophy of science, and of work that attempts to develop a unified science studies approach. Required for all students in the Science Studies Program. Prerequisites: enrollment in Science Studies Program.. (Cross-listed as Communication 225B, Philosophy 209B, and Sociology 255B.) Study and discussion of selected topics in the science studies field. Required for all students in the Science Studies Program. May be repeated as course content changes annually. Prerequisites: enrollment in Science Studies Program.. (Cross-listed as Communication 225C, Philosophy 209C, and Sociology 255C.) A forum for the presentation and discussion of research in progress in science studies, by graduate students, faculty, and visitors. Required for all students in the Science Studies Program. May be repeated as course content changes annually. Prerequisites: enrollment in the Science Studies Program.. (Cross-listed as COGR 225D, PHIL 209D, SOCG 255D.) Focus on recent literature in the history, philosophy, and sociology of science, technology, and medicine. Required of all students in the Science Studies Program. Prerequisites: HIGR 238 is a prerequisite for HIGR 241; enrollment in Science Studies Program or instructor’s permission.. Intensive study of specific problems in the history of the life sciences and earth sciences, ranging in period from the Renaissance to the twenty-first century. May be repeated for credit as topics will vary annually. Prerequisites: graduate standing and department stamp required.. Study and discussion of classic and recent scholarship on sound production and cultures of listening. Emphasizes historical literature but also includes works in literary studies, art history, music, and other fields. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. Introduction to the literature of Latin American history. A three-quarter sequence of readings and discussions taught each quarter by members of the staff. Required for all beginning students for a graduate degree specializing in Latin American history; open and strongly recommended to other students using Latin American history as a secondary field for a graduate degree. HIGR 245A covers the colonial period, from conquest to independence to today; HIGR 245B covers South America from independence to today; HIGR 245C covers Mexico, Cuba, and Central America from independence to today. The three quarters need not be taken in sequence. Reading knowledge of Spanish is required.. A two-quarter course involving readings and research on sixteenth- through eighteenth-century Latin America. Students are expected to compose a paper based on original research that is due in the second quarter. Reading knowledge of Spanish required. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter.. A two-quarter course involving readings and research; the first quarter is devoted to the nineteenth and the second quarter to the twentieth century. Students are expected to compose a paper based on original research that is due in the second quarter. An IP grade will be awarded at the end of the first quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Reading knowledge of Spanish and/or Portuguese is helpful but not required.. The course will study three major twentieth-century interpreters of Andean history and society. Mariátegui is Latin America’s most original socialist intellectual; Haya de la Torre is the founder of Peru’s most important party; and Arguedas was the most profound interpreter of the role of Indian peasants in the Andean nations.. Readings in the historiographical literature on the late Ottoman Empire (eighteenth to twentieth century). Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. Readings in the historiographical literature on Middle Eastern states in the colonial period. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. Readings in the historiographical literature on the Middle East in the national/postcolonial eras. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. A three-quarter sequence of readings and discussions on the bibliographical and monographic literature of American history from the colonial period to the present. Taught by different members of the staff each quarter, the course is required of all beginning graduate students in American history.. Readings and discussion in selected areas of American history for advanced graduate students. An IP (in progress) grade will be awarded the first quarter. The second quarter will be devoted to the presentation, discussion, and evaluation of work in progress. A final grade will be awarded at the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 267A is a prerequisite for 267B.. Students will develop skills in presenting and assessing new research and offering feedback to work in progress by senior students and faculty. Course is required to be taken twice by third-year students and highly recommended for audit by all students in US history. (S/U grades only.). HIGR 275A is the first quarter of a two-quarter research seminar in Middle Eastern history. Seminar topics will vary. Reading knowledge of Arabic or Turkish is expected. A paper, based on original research, will be due at the end of the second quarter. Final grade will not be given until the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: graduate standing or consent of instructor.. HIGR 275B is the second quarter of a two-quarter research seminar in Middle Eastern history. Seminar topics will vary. Reading knowledge of Arabic or Turkish is expected. A paper, based on original research, will be due at the end of the quarter. Final grade will be awarded for HIGR 275A and B at the end of the second quarter. Prerequisites: 275A and graduate standing or consent of instructor.. For students advanced to candidacy to the doctorate. Discussion, criticism, and revision of drafts of chapters of theses and of work to be submi